So, what you hear people saying now,
well, because AI is changing the
workforce,
>> [music]
>> we now need the humanities for these
soft skills that are now incredibly
important. Mhm. And um
>> I may have said [music] that to myself
contemplating my own children's future.
Yes.
>> Yes, this is the exactly the wrong case.
>> Okay.
Jennifer Frey, welcome to Interesting
[music] Times. Thank you so much for
having me. I'm thrilled to be here. So,
I am, like you, [music] I think, a book
person.
And I feel like for basically, if not my
entire life, at least my entire adult
life, I have been living in the shadow
of the decline of
all that I hold dear in terms of novels,
poetry, philosophy,
essays, history, right? Literacy is
going down, fewer young people read
books every year, and the story of
[snorts] the academic humanities is
basically a story of declining
enrollment and disappearing jobs.
And now
comes AI, maybe as the final destroyer,
burying Plato and Aristotle in a wave of
slop, or maybe maybe as a weird kind of
savior, creating a world where suddenly
having a broad understanding of history
and human nature becomes important
again.
And I have you here.
You're a liberal arts evangelist who
built a college humanities program that
was briefly quite successful,
and we're going to talk about the
decline of the humanities, maybe if we
can be optimistic about their potential
rebirth, and maybe just about the career
prospects for our kids.
That's a lot.
>> That's a lot. It's a lot. Well, you
know, we've got we've got a little bit
of time. get
>> it. So, but I'm going to start by
playing the part of a skeptic and I'm
going to try and give you a little bit
of a hard time
about the vocation that you've chosen.
So, suppose I didn't have any kind of
primal ancestral attachment to
literature or the arts. Suppose I'm just
a technically competent person who wants
my kids to learn useful skills and be
employable in 21st century America.
Why should I care if my kids study the
humanities? What's in it for them? Yeah,
that's a fair and very important
question and your skepticism is
obviously very widely shared.
Um it was shared by my own parents um
and also by my husband's parents. So, I
married a philosopher
and a professor and when both of us went
to explain to our parents what we were
going to study in college, uh it was not
met so warmly um
or with affection.
Um so, I think the skepticism is fair.
Um
you know, I don't know that it's uh so
much a focus on books, although I share
your view that the purported death of
literacy is a is a tragedy. But if we go
back to the beginning of philosophy and
Plato, I mean uh Socrates of course
didn't write anything and was very
skeptical. Uh and it wasn't a wasn't a
book culture, right? Because we didn't
have the printing press yet. So,
certainly I think um human learning uh
predates our book culture. Um so, for me
it's it's less about books even though
I'm a I'm a bookworm.
Um but I think, you know, the the deeper
question is about uh
what I would call liberal learning
um or or a kind of learning that is the
cultivation of the higher capacities in
a person and the cultivation of those
capacities as it were for its own sake
because it is good and important to
cultivate them
because we're human.
Right? The question, the teleological
question of like what is it for is a
very deep and important question for us
humans.
And so I think, you know, my concern is
that
we have lost our ability to understand
the intrinsic value of engaging in that
sort of self-cultivation.
Right? The Greeks would call it paideia,
the Germans would call it Bildung.
Um I might just call it
uh liberal education or a liberal
learning, but it but it's all the same
sort of thing. It's about um
what is it to
contribute to and live in a flourishing
human society? Is this a moral
understanding? Cuz there are people who
will say
you know, Germany in the early 20th
century was one of the most cultured
societies in human history in terms of
its engagement with
philosophy, literature, the arts, music.
Um and yet none of that obviously
prevented highly cultivated Germans from
participating in atrocities.
Where's the the proof, I guess, that
people who go through this process
gain some kind of greater moral
awareness?
>> Well, I mean, I think the proof is
always in the student, right? But you
also have to recognize that there is an
ineliminable element of human freedom
and education. So when we talk about
teaching and learning, right? The
learning
um has to come from the student.
And um
you know,
a good teacher who has a good pedagogy
is always going to be especially attuned
to the student and what the student
needs and how to draw out of the student
um the best that that student can
achieve. But you cannot, trust me, and
any educator will tell you this, you
cannot force the student.
Um
you know, you can you can incentivize.
We do that through grades and
credentials.
Um but ultimately they have to want that
sort of self-cultivation. Now, when you
look at a culture, right?
Um and you want to ask yourself, okay,
well, like how did we go from, you know,
Weimar Germany to Nazism?
Obviously, education is going to be a
part of that, but it's not in any way
going to be the whole of it.
Um but I I don't buy the, you know,
Nazism is a proof that
higher learning doesn't work.
Um
I mean, the point of fact is that the
Nazis were were very much against higher
education in in many ways and wanted to
constrain and control it. They had some
very specific ideas, let's say.
>> What But [clears throat] what about the
What about the idea that this kind of
learning has to defend the value of
engagement for its own sake
like even if it doesn't make someone a
better person? Like would you say that
there is a inherent value in being able
to read and engage with Plato's Republic
or being able to listen to and
experience
you know, Handel or Bach or anyone else
who's considered a great composer
that just is is a thing unto itself?
Absolutely.
>> Right. So even if even if the person
having that experience remains a bad
person in their like
everyday interactions, they have still
gained something valuable. Absolutely.
Yes. I mean, um you know, we're all
deeply imperfect Ross
>> [laughter]
>> in a variety of ways.
In a variety of ways and I think I think
the Nazism case is especially
interesting. Um and here I'll just be
maximally provocative because I think
that it's true.
Um something that was happening in
higher education at this period of time
was eugenics.
So if you look at institutions of higher
education in the United States and in
the UK, what you will find is that
eugenics was very popular and accepted
almost universally.
Now, I think that's a very dangerous
ideology.
Um but that ideology is coming out of
our fanciest institutions and of course
you can find it in Supreme Court cases
and everything else. Now that
toxic ideology makes its way into Nazi
ideology. The Nazis were not
like unique in having this eugenic
worldview.
Um and institutions of higher education
were not somehow inoculated from that
either.
But then isn't there an argument
a critique of the humanities argument
that says
that intellectual mentality and the
eugenic mentality could fit could fit
together pretty naturally. It's like
okay, to be human is to appreciate Bach
and Plato
and only our smartest university
students do that so only they're fully
human and so on down the eugenesis
argument. So tell me so tell me why
that's wrong and why why are the
humanities actually for everyone rather
than being
a kind of rarefied pursuit? Yeah, thank
you for asking that. So I just think as
a matter of fact, we have a lot of
evidence
that uh
well I I think I you know, I tend to
talk about uh
liberal arts education rather than the
humanities, but in the best case they're
sort of the same expression.
Um
you know, this idea that
um
a higher sort of learning and a kind of
self-cultivation is is truly liberating.
Um that it helps people have um
a deeper sense of purpose and meaning in
their life. Um and also helps them to
cultivate a space of genuine leisure.
Right?
Um that is something where there's a
significant track record, whether we're
talking about Frederick Douglass or Anna
Julia Cooper or W. E. B. Du Bois um or
whether we're talking about entire
movements of the British working class,
right? Like really taking control
of their education by whatever means.
Um we have this kind of great cloud of
witnesses um who can attest to the fact
that this has completely transformed
their lives, not just materially or not
principally for material um gains, but
spiritually. Can you say a little bit
more about
the liberal arts and the British working
class? Because I think I I think people
are accustomed to the idea that you
know, you can pluck a poor person or an
enslaved person who you know, then turns
out to be
a genius of some kind. That that's sort
of the individual talent exists, but
it's really striking to read about the
role that the liberal arts played in
these large-scale working-class
communities in the past. No, I mean it's
an absolutely fascinating history and I
don't know why people don't talk about
it more. [clears throat]
And not just in the British working
class, but certainly there have also
been similar movements in the United
States.
Um what you what you see, I think really
clearly, is that this need that I'm
talking about, um the need for
self-reflection,
self-knowledge,
understanding,
um the cultivating the life of the mind,
um this is like a basic human need, and
it it really connects to me personally
because I did not grow up in a home
filled with books. I did not have
intellectual parents. My father drove a
forklift in a paper factory,
and my mother was a elementary school
teacher.
Um but they were,
you know, good parents who took me to
the library. Um I just started reading
on my own. I think I was four or
something, and I really loved it, and so
they would sort of find ways to
make that more available to me.
Um and I had this like incredibly robust
interior life as a kid. I mean, just
like
>> [laughter]
>> like off the charts.
>> But what about your parents? Do you
think that your parents
were missing something that had been
denied them in their own childhoods that
you were just fortunate to achieve? You
know, certainly uh in my in my mother's
case, um you know, she uh left the house
at 16. She came from like
um a not great home situation that she
needed to get out of, and so I think
there was a practical imperative for her
>> [gasps]
>> um to to make money and get settled down
and things like that. Um but it's also
true that over time, um my parents had
two children who were pretty
intellectual. My brother's also a
philosophy PhD.
Uh
>> [laughter]
>> um somehow miraculously my my parents uh
sent two intellectual Catholics into the
world. And it's not it's not like they
were never reading. It's just that
you know, a lot of professors come from
families of professors. I am not one of
them.
Um and so these this kind of history,
um it it connects to me cuz you know, my
background is more working class and my
experience of kind of deepening my own
interior life without having any sense
that that was like a project you engaged
in. It was just something that I did.
Um and that I later came to see as
uh the most
uh essential thing that I ever did.
Um I I think it's incredibly precious
and we should do all we can to to try to
incentivize and encourage and protect
that.
But doing all we can, at least at this
moment, it seems to me requires
making some claims that Americans in the
early 21st century are pretty
uncomfortable making. Such as? About the
idea that just for instance, that
an encounter with Shakespeare is better
than an encounter with
you know, YA fiction. Or that an
encounter with The Odyssey
is better, however good it turns out to
be, than an encounter with Christopher
Nolan's adaptation of The Odyssey. And
the skeptic says, "Look, you know, it's
a free country.
There's a marketplace of books and
ideas. And back in the old days, when
all you had was a Bible and Shakespeare,
maybe people felt like they had to read
those things, but now they, you know,
read
they they read what they want to read
and maybe it doesn't rise to your
standards, but
what's, you know, you have to make a
case, right? To me, the Philistine
skeptic, that that Shakespeare is better
than John Grisham.
Is Shakespeare better than John Grisham?
Yes. Why?
Um
I haven't read John Grisham since high
school, though I have
>> I haven't read John Grisham in in in a
while.
>> [laughter]
>> I'm just plucky
I'm dating myself as a 40s person that
that it's better that Shakespeare is
better. Give me a difference. What's one
one one qualifying difference that lets
us tell
that we should be reading Hamlet
before or
distinct from reading The Firm or A Time
to Kill? Because
Hamlet wow, The Firm. Sorry, [laughter]
I just I actually read The Firm in high
school. I actually read The Firm in high
school.
I also read a lot of trash just FYI.
Read like all of V.C. Andrews for
example. Anyway,
so I would say that I mean let's just
look at the language first of all.
Um, Shakespeare's language
is is justly globally famous, right? As
just a
a very high form of English. And what
he's doing with language
is is to this day like so astonishing.
It's really it somehow never loses
its power to surprise and sort of invite
you to think about what language can do.
I mean I think the best writers do this.
And also you know, Shakespeare really
challenges you. And
uh I enjoyed The Firm. Just I mean just
just to be clear. It was entertaining.
But there's a difference between
being amused and entertained and I think
really
um
you know, experiencing maybe what
[clears throat] we would call great art
or high art.
Um, because great art or high art really
calls you I think to those
transcendentals, right? Truth, beauty
and goodness. And it calls you to them
in a way that
asks you to ascend to something that is
clearly like
demanding
and
that takes a sort of more deep modes of
reflection. Right, if you're going to
read like a like a Dan Brown novel, it's
very difficult to imagine
having sustained conversations
about Dan Brown novels like over years.
It's quite easy to imagine doing that
with Shakespeare. I do that.
Like
that's it's just it's just so rich. And
so I think we should not shy away from
saying that. There is a kind of
depth in great art that demands our
attention
in a way that is absent in
Dan Brown. But so that is
a defense of hierarchy.
Yes.
>> Right, which is in some way
undemocratic. And there No, no, I
disagree with that. I'm sorry.
Say more.
Sorry.
>> [laughter]
>> Um
Yeah, okay. I mean, yeah, of course
there's a hierarchy of goods. But um
I I just think that if you have no sense
of higher
then it becomes very difficult to talk
about higher education generally.
Whenever we're talking about
goods in life, right, there are
trade-offs and we need to balance
things, but as a matter of fact
the sort of like let's just take kind of
great books education. You find great
books education in community colleges.
You find great books education still
completely outside of institutions of
higher education.
You find great books education in
certain high schools. I mean, I think
these things
don't necessarily
uh don't have to be luxury goods.
And I think it's a choice that we make
politically to say that they are. And we
can debate that choice, but that's just
a choice that we have
because it's I mean
it this isn't like a science lab. Um I
don't have a microscope that costs
$30,000. It's really just you need some
books and they're pretty cheaply
available these days and Right.
>> be done.
>> But you don't But you also don't have
you also don't have a way of
definitively measuring, because you
don't have a microscope, and proving
>> [snorts]
>> you know, this is valuable, this is not,
right? In in the humanities. You have to
rely on
claims that I think make sense to a lot
of people, but are not sort of the most
rigorous scientific claims. And if we
were sitting here and we invited
Plato
into the conversation Right. Right. That
would be wild. he might say
listen to this, you know, uh listen
listen to this this woman who wants who
thinks that like an encounter with
greatness and truth can be mediated by a
playwright?
Should we playwright? They should all be
banished from the ideal city.
Right? But there But there I all that
I'm suggesting is that
if we're trying to figure out what this
thing is Mhm. and who should be exposed
to it Mhm. even the classics themselves
do not agree, right? This is itself
contested within the very tradition
you're defending.
>> So, I just finished teaching a class uh
called the history of liberal education
in the university. We started with Plato
and we ended basically with Weber.
And and there's all kinds of
disagreements or different formulations.
You know, some people like Cicero are
are more invested in sort of the civic
aspect of humane learning.
Um Where it's enabling you to
participate fully in politics. Oh, yeah.
>> Right. And and he is he is writing um
explicitly in this kind of Republican
ideal. And but I I think there's a
remarkable kind of red thread running
through all of that.
Which is this idea that there is
something really essential and important
not just to individuals, but to culture
and society in having
something that is more than an education
that we would call professional and that
they would call servile. Um you know,
Aristotle interestingly and this always
like really strikes students cuz they
just think it's so wild. Like it's just
so unbelievably wild, but Aristotle says
the goal of education is leisure.
And we forget that the Greek word the
root for school is leisure.
And Aristotle says, "Look, you know, we
wage war for peace. Like we work for
leisure." But leisure is not idleness or
amusement and it's definitely not just
resting up so you can get back to work.
It is that space that we need to set
aside to cultivate the highest parts of
us. And so I just think there is this
red thread there and you're right,
there's lots of disagreement. Right,
nobody nobody who's ever had any
encounter with any kind of great books
learning experience comes away thinking
like, "Oh, yeah, like the West. That was
like one thing."
Uh Just one one idea.
>> like no.
>> Plato Plato to NATO, right? It's the So,
okay, so
we're not in a world
where we educate for leisure. I think
that's I think that's fair to say right
now. And whatever what we're And but
whatever whatever has happened in
American education and American higher
education in the last three or four
decades has seemed pretty unremittingly
hostile to that mentality. And that you
can see this in just, you know, the
numbers [snorts]
of people studying the liberal arts. You
can see it in,
you know, lots of colleges are going to
close over the next 30 years, but it's
liberal arts colleges that are
sort of on the chopping block first. And
then
there's this, I think, political and
cultural polarization that's eaten away
at the humanities from both sides. With
the left critiquing the very idea of a
canon, that it's all just dead white
male privilege. The right saying, "Oh,
you know, these liberal arts academics,
they're all just irredeemably woke, and
they should be defunded in favor of more
useful subjects, right?" Yeah. So, I
want to talk about those forces, but I
want you to tell me about your own
experience first, before we talk about
the left and the right. So, tell me why
you left the University of South
Carolina,
uh and moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma in 2023,
was it? Yeah. Tell me Tell me Tell me
about what you
what you did. Yeah, it was kind of wild
from beginning to end, really. Um so, if
you look at sort of the decline of the
humanities, you see like spikes. So,
there was the Great Recession.
>> [snorts]
>> Um and then there was COVID. These are
downward spikes. Yeah.
>> And the the the trends obviously predate
COVID
um at the University of Tulsa, for
example, they um had this initiative,
which thankfully failed, but it was
called true commitment.
Um and the idea was basically to take
the College of Arts and Sciences and
kind of consolidate it, um and make TU a
sort of explicit trade school.
Um and so, the philosophy department
like was shuttered along with many other
departments and programs.
And you know, I was complaining loudly
about all of these things.
And, um,
at some point in 2021,
um, I was dissing the University of
Tulsa for true commitment, and I got
this reply on Twitter. Actually, it was
May 2021. I got this reply, and the
reply said, "Hey Jen, like we're just
not that bad."
>> [laughter]
>> And I was like, "Who's that?" And it was
the president of the University of
Tulsa, which was slightly
>> the magic of social media in action.
>> and I just sort of sheepishly said, um,
you know, "Did I say anything wrong?"
Um, and and he's he said, "No, it's not
that you said something wrong." He was
like, "But you should come visit us.
Like we're not that bad." And, um, so
actually I did go visit them. Uh,
subsequently, I went and I gave a talk
on the university and the liberal arts.
And that university president said, "Oh,
I I want to start an honors college,
like a mini St. John's. You know, I want
it to be like great books. I want it to
be
>> just for our listeners who don't know,
there's two colleges, one in Annapolis
and one in Santa Fe, that are explicitly
great books undergraduate programs.
>> books all the way.
Um, and I was like, "Oh, well, that's
Yeah, you should you should totally do
that. That would be amazing. Like, I
would definitely be cheering you on."
And he was like, "Well, would you like
want to run it?" And I said, "Well, I'll
think about it." And then, uh, obviously
I agreed to do it. Um, but I wasn't in
any way looking for an administrative
job. I was not looking in the natural
law.
>> [snorts]
>> Um, but I was, you know, recently
tenured and very happy where I was, and
very invested in my own projects. But,
once I was given this,
what I thought would surely be an
unrepeatable opportunity, uh, to sort of
put my ideas into practice, which as a
philosopher is like exciting, but also
like very dangerous,
>> [laughter]
>> like being good at thinking and like
doing is It's necessarily the same
skill. So, um
>> queen is an important figure in in uh
Yes. So, after contemplating the forms,
I decided to move to Tulsa and try to
realize this thing. Um
I I thought it would work, but I really
had no idea. I mean, it was kind of
terrifying.
Um but it did. It did work. It um really
attracted a lot of students and uh
donors and foundations. And, you know,
we were just
incredibly excited about everything that
was happening. And I think
um
>> And tell just just for background, Tulsa
is a private university, right? It's not
a state school. Right. It's sort of the
private liberal arts
um option.
>> School in in Oklahoma, right. And so,
how many students does Tulsa have?
A little less than 3,000. I think it's
this
>> undergrad? Yes. Yeah. I think with a few
thrown in grad students, it's more like
4,000.
>> Okay. And so, how many how many kids,
roughly,
did you end up enrolling in the honors
college? So, every year we were
somewhere between
26%
of incoming freshmen.
>> Okay. Yeah.
Um
>> And what did the just very quickly, what
did the overall program look like?
>> So, you'd be signing up first and
foremost for the core. So, that's four
semesters of great books. You can think
like from Homer to Hannah Arendt. So, uh
first uh seminar is the three ancient
cities, Athens, Rome, Jerusalem.
Um and, you know, you you read uh Plato
and Aristotle and Greek tragedy and and
some Greek history. And then, you do the
same for the Romans. And then, of
course, you read some of the Bible.
Um and then, you go into long Middle
Ages. And that's basically
Augustine to the Reformation. So, we
start with the Confessions, and we go
all the way into, you know, Luther and
Calvin.
And then your second year in the core,
um, it's the birth of modernity. So,
there's where you get
>> year. Yeah. Lot going on.
>> Yeah. No, it's a it's a fantastic
course.
Um, so that's basically Machiavelli to
Mary Shelley.
And then the last sequence is 19th and
20th century and that starts with de
Tocqueville and then actually it ends uh
the professor gets sort of like a free
choice about where it ends. So, I would
say Homer to Hannah Arendt cuz I think
Hannah Arendt is the last required
reading.
So, like St. John's, it's a set
curriculum and that was very important,
um, that everyone be reading the same
books because it was also a residential
experience. And like we didn't force you
to live in the honors dorm, but most
most most students wanted to.
And um, so I think we had like sort of
three pillars, um, when I would address
incoming freshman as Dean of Honors, the
first thing that I would remind them is
that they are going to die.
And that recognition of this was the
first step towards wisdom.
Um, so strong mission and vision, right?
So, we are not here to prepare you for a
job, we are here to prepare you for life
and for being a human being.
Um, secondly, community. So, it was very
it's very important to me cuz I think
that it's true, um, that liberal
learning take place in a community.
And then the third thing is we took very
seriously,
in a way that very few people are
willing to do, um, the connection
between an education for freedom and the
need to cultivate character, right? That
helps you to be free. We had these sort
of virtues of liberal learning that we
would name and talk about explicitly.
Um, and they were things like humility
and civility
and fortitude. Um, and then also
curiously old-fashioned ones like uh
studiousness, where that has nothing to
do with hitting the books. Um,
studiositas is sort of like cultivated
attention.
So, sort of like training that desire to
know so that it's um focused on the good
stuff as opposed to like looking at Tik
Tok for 5 hours a day or
you know, um yeah. Hypothetically.
>> Hypothetically.
>> Um, what what Tell Just say something
about the kind of students that you got.
This is a plain state university, like
who Who who is
Who is signing up for this program? And
So, we
We You know, uh we got students from all
over the country first and foremost.
Although obviously a healthy number from
the states that circle around Oklahoma,
so like Texas, Arkansas, Missouri,
Kansas, Colorado,
etc.
And um and and they were mostly STEM
students. So, you were not their major.
No, absolutely not. So, this was a
program that they did parallel to their
major. Yeah, I mean I think this was
like a sort of stroke of genius on the
part of the president who sort of saw an
honors college as a really great way to
recenter liberal learning within general
education. Cuz the the point is to give
that general education, that liberal
foundation upon which you can
specialize, which is, you know, how the
medieval university is structured.
Everybody goes through the arts
curriculum before they can study
theology or medicine or canon law.
Right, the real sciences.
Um
>> [clears throat]
>> but most gen ed requirements in American
higher education
are not
the most super rigorous things, right?
So, I'm just curious how students who
were studying mechanical engineering
balanced that,
you know, pretty rigorous course of
study with the kind of like intense
communal
>> Yeah. Socratic style that you were
trying to build. Yeah, I mean, they
loved it. I mean, is the is the short
answer. You know, they would always say
things like, "None of my other classes
are like this." You know.
Um and they're
>> po- in a positive way, to be clear. Not
Yeah. I mean, just sort of like you kind
of never know what's going to happen in
an honors class, um which I think is
part of the excitement. But, there's a
whole community of students outside the
seminar who are reading the same text.
And so, you have this shared basis of
learning. But, it's amazing to see the
fruits that arise from that, because
they just go back to the dorm and
they're all kind of wondering like,
"What was going on in Plato's
Symposium?" Cuz it's a really strange
text in so many ways.
And um you know, they would they would
spontaneously
uh put on their own their own symposium.
I think the secret sauce in honors
really
um wasn't uh
the specific text that we chose. It was
just sort of the community and the
mission and the integration
[clears throat] of those two things and
the fact that even though it was really
hard, it was where their friends were.
Right? So, if you look at the motto for
honors, it was wisdom, virtue,
friendship, which is like a very
Aristotelian triad. But, the friendship
thing was really key
because you know, for Aristotle, uh the
context in which uh
wisdom is sought um and virtue is
cultivated and exercised is friendship.
So,
you know, you're obviously a biased
observer. You clearly loved and
appreciated [laughter] the thing you put
together. Not everyone loved and
appreciated it, and it does not exist in
the same way any
anymore. So, what what happened? So, um
I mean, that's an interesting and
complicated story and I've I've
certainly talked about it elsewhere, but
um you know, the the short version is
that um the president who recruited me
and hired me
um and his provost um left. So, there
was a regime change and pretty much as
soon as a new provost was installed, um
I was just called in and said, "You
know, you're out."
And [snorts] the honors would be
restructured and I obviously wanted to
know why that would be the case.
Um and I I was just told um that they
needed to save money. I mean, eventually
they just found other people to do it.
So, So, the program still exists?
>> It still exists.
>> You're not in charge of it.
>> Correct.
>> And just
give me
give me a theory of the case
as to I mean, it would be speculative
um
and so, I I hesitate to do that.
>> I
I would like to pull some general
lessons about Sure.
why the challenges that the humanities
face from your experience.
>> Mhm. It's possible that your experience
doesn't offer those lessons and it was
just
just a matter of
you know, you were let's say a favorite
of an outgoing president and a new
regime didn't want to keep you around
and it was all sort of just that kind of
campus politics or faculty politics.
>> Mhm.
Or it's possible that
this experience tells us something about
um
why it's hard to
build and sustain the humanities on
college campuses. I think it's probably
the second to some degree.
>> I do. I agree as well. Um, with the
caveat that obviously like it's
speculative
um, on my part.
Um, [snorts]
because uh, I was given really zero um,
zero indication of of what was really
behind it. Um, and I've not been privy
to those conversations myself, but
uh, with that caveat, I would say that
we can learn a few things. One is that
student interest and demand simply does
not matter.
And um, it's important to see that
because uh, I I wrote an op-ed uh, for
the New York Times.
>> Times, people can read it. Um, and uh,
my op-ed just basically said, "Hey, you
know, there's this standard story that
students um, can't do this and they
don't want to do it." And I'm here to
tell you that I think that story is
false.
And I think we should talk about the
fact that um, it can be the case that
students want to do this
um, even though it's hard and very
challenging and it's totally voluntary.
They don't have to do this.
Um, and it can still be disinvested. I
mean, so one clear implication was that,
you know, our budget was reduced by 92%.
Um, upon my leaving and the faculty that
I have hired are gone. Okay. In fact,
literally everyone I hired is gone. So,
it's like there has to be some what?
Ideological reason not to do it. What is
the reason not to do it if students are
interested in it? Uh, that's that's the
million-dollar question. But, we need we
need to we need theories as to why. You
don't have to just be totally specific
about
Tulsa, but I would like you to
generalize a little bit
based on your experience about the kind
of headwinds, and I mean political
headwinds especially, that a project
like yours faces. So, I'll I'll give you
two
two theories. Mhm. Um and
ask about I guess I'll try and ask you
to react to both of them, right? So,
here's
one theory
would be that
fundamentally
the academy has adopted a kind of
left-wing
perspective on
um on the humanities that basically says
greatness like you know, everything that
we were talking about in the beginning
of this conversation is just sort of a
political construct associated with
you know, white male Western hegemony
and that the point of the humanities to
the extent there is a point is to
deconstruct and challenge and critique
that.
And that's what we're doing. That's what
the humanities is supposed to do, Yes.
right? And therefore, a program that
says, "No, long before you do that, you
have to have this direct encounter with
ancient Greeks and medieval Christians
and so on."
Uh that's just reactionary, right? And
that doesn't have a place in the modern
academy. Is there part of the left
that's just sort of an enemy of the
humanities as you understand it?
Um okay. So, I think that um there are
definitely people within humanistic
disciplines that understand what they do
very explicitly as a political project.
And it is a kind of radical left-wing
sort of thing. Uh that's just a fact. No
one can deny it.
Um
and so, do those people love great
books? Um typically no. And so, that's
like a real thing. I think though an
actually bigger problem
is the over-professionalization
and hyper specialization of the
humanities. So, the biggest resistance
that I found wasn't necessarily
ideological, although that existed, but
it was this idea that you would teach us
that syllabus.
It was just like, "No, I don't do that."
And so, part of that was, "That's just
not my expertise."
Right, I I I teach from a place of
expertise, and great books is like the
opposite of that. Am I a classicist? No.
Can I teach Homer? Yes.
Because the point isn't to create
scholarship on Homer. That's not why
we're there. If you wanted to do that,
you should definitely major in classics,
where you will be trained to create
scholarship. But we are there to have an
encounter with that text
um in a way that is more than just a
book club sort of thing. It's serious,
but its goal is not sort of what Weber
would call Wissenschaft, right?
Um its goal is more
>> is a Wissenschaft, please?
>> scholarship. Um thank you.
>> So, like And um so, so there was that
sort of resistance, right? Like, "I'm a
literature scholar. I can't teach
philosophy or history or like it's just
not my thing."
Um And and also, I'm a literature
scholar, and I have a very narrow ambit
in literature, where I'm here I'm here
to teach Oh, for sure. Victorian
fictions in a, you know,
anti-imperial or late imperial, you
know, I'm in a very narrow frame of what
teaching literature means, right?
>> exactly.
Um and so, that is something that I I
want us to have a conversation about is
sort of the way that specialization,
and really it's a conversation about the
way the institutional structure of the
research university has disadvantaged
the humanities in particular. Because if
expertise
if scientific expertise is the gold
standard of knowledge, which I think you
can make a very strong case that that is
the gold standard within the academy,
uh the [snorts] humanities really lose
out.
Right? Because we're forced into a mold
that maybe isn't uh the best for our
flourishing. And um so I I think that's
part of it.
Yes, um the hyperpolarization of all of
our institutions has hurt the
humanities, but it's also obviously hurt
the university generally. If you look at
um statistics of trust in institutions
of higher education, they're
catastrophically low. I think it is
simply a fact that one thing that has
contributed to the loss of social trust
is the very strong perception that uh
our institutions have been ideologically
captured. And so we need to reflect in a
serious way, in a way that Yale, for
example, is currently reflecting.
Um I think the Yale report is a
significant and interesting and and
important document. I think most of its
recommendations are are good ones, ones
that need to be made.
Um so I'm very happy to talk about
higher education reform, but I think it
needs to be done in ways that really
kind of strive uh for the common good.
Um and less just about owning your
enemies or dominating your enemies or
winning the culture wars. Um
that's [clears throat] not going to save
the humanities. It's going to It's going
to just be another nail in the coffin.
Let Let's Let's just talk about a
different kind of ideological pressure
that from from the right.
>> Sure. It seems that
there's a way in which the right in
America and American culture
has sort of two faces when it comes to
the humanities. There's the face that
wants to be in the business of defending
and saving what you're doing against
both sort of woke academia and hyper
professionalization, right? Like there's
there's a side of conservatism that just
people I've been in rooms with and spent
years knowing and talking to who just
nods along
with everything that you say.
Then there's also a really important
side of conservatism that is just like
just is totally bought into
a sort of professional model of
education uh that is
skeptical of um anything that seems like
useless useless degrees, right? The
stereotype of the
you know, the the reckless graduate
student who got the degree in puppetry
and wants Joe Biden
to bail to bail them out, right? Is you
know, it's a very powerful it's a very
powerful on the American right. So
[snorts]
I'm curious how that like you were in a
red state, you know, you were at a
school a school probably with an unusual
number of Republican donors relative to
maybe not relative to other liberal arts
schools. Like which which side of
conservatism is more powerful?
Is conservatism a friend of the liberal
arts or an enemy?
I mean, what an interesting question.
>> Yeah, it's a small small question. I
think I don't need to tell you that, you
know, conservatives are at war with one
another about what conservatism really
is right now. So
>> that. that also affects, you know,
conservatism in education in all of its
forms.
Um but I also think that there are
disagreements about how to achieve
higher education reform. Um
but you know, to your to your specific
question about utility versus leisure.
>> Yeah. That's that's that's question one.
How much how much utilitarian hostility
do you feel like you get from people on
the right?
I would say that um you find this on the
left and the right. So let us remember
that it was the Obama administration
that rolled out the scorecard of majors.
So, this is really that this kind of
utilitarian push is, I believe,
bipartisan. Now, what you do see right
now is red states like Utah and Indiana
and Ohio and Texas passing legislation
um that disinvests or shuts down
um departments that don't have
sufficient enrollment. And you know,
that has definitely hurt some uh well,
quite a few humanities departments, but
like it's also brought down physics and
math.
So, it's a it's a very blunt instrument,
but in all of those cases, what you will
find is a rationale that says we need
workforce alignment.
Um and we need to have a sort of like
work-ready graduates. So, there there is
that, and I think I think if you But you
But But again, you have
>> set your you set your program up at
Tulsa,
it seems like in an effort to
actually kind of
try and preempt that kind of critique to
say, "Look, we can have liberal arts
education that works in parallel with
pre-professional education. You don't
have to major in classics to get some
kind of classical encounter." Right?
>> And I still I mean, I I still
fundamentally believe that and I'm
dedicated to that. Yeah. Right. But that
didn't save you.
No. Yeah.
What I What about the question that you
just mentioned of this argument on the
right about how you get
sort of
effective change in higher ed, right?
So, I Two prior guests on this program
have included
>> [laughter]
>> um I'm sure I've watched them all.
Recently former You don't have to say
that. You've got You've got, you know,
more important texts to encounter, but
former US Senator Ben Sasse, who was at
the University of Florida,
um and worked on a program that was set
up by the Republican state government of
Florida. Yeah. Uh designed not just to
be about the liberal arts, but in part
to sort of have a strong liberal arts
tradition within a public university.
I've also interviewed a while ago now
Christopher Rufo, right? It's a leading
leading right-wing activist who just
takes the straight-forward view that
conservatives inside academia are
totally deluded if they think they're
going to get anywhere without
Republican state legislatures or Donald
Trump coming in and saying to schools,
you have to teach
great books or Western civilization and
so on. So, Sasse is a gentle voice. Rufo
is a harsher voice, but they're both
they're both figures who
who see I think a pretty substantial
role for politics in
making a place for the humanities in
higher ed.
What's your take on that view?
I mean, I think that when we're talking
about public institutions, um it's
obviously political and it's very
difficult to avoid this reality.
Um however, I will say a few things. You
know, there was a large-scale
disinvestment from states uh
after 2008.
And so, the case is a little bit weaker.
>> But just on the disinvestment front, are
you suggesting basically that that
like red state governments will
maybe set up a school for civic
engagement or civic thought or something
that
presents itself as sort of a place to
preserve the humanities, but meanwhile
they're cutting the humanities
everywhere else? That like that's
Yeah.
>> Um you know, the civic center movement,
it's a relatively new movement. Um, I
definitely support it.
Um, but it's not going to save the
humanities. Um, the way that the civic
centers are structured is they
understand themselves as, um, homes of
disciplinary knowledge and expertise,
right?
Um, and civics like is is meant to be a
a specific kind of expertise. And that's
great. I don't you know, uh, the more
the merrier. I don't have any I I
certainly have no problem with
legislators
um, investing in Hamilton or the school
of civic leadership and things like
this. Um, now we can have a separate
conversation about, you know, how
they're being run and things like that.
But a but a great books education is
is on its face sort of simultaneously a
liberal and a civic education.
Um, and so, of course, I support
movements, um, that see that in our
universities and give them money.
Um, but I I don't think it's going to
save the humanities. Um, the only thing
that might save the humanities is
really, um, getting serious and
re-centering undergraduate education
again.
Um, and institutionally speaking, like
we're not set up to do that. The
research university is set up to
incentivize research.
Um, how do we make general education
liberal again, right? In that classical
sense. That's what I'm going to be doing
next in my career. Um, I believe that
we've really dropped the ball when it
comes to general education in this
country.
Um, students have no sense that their
education is anything other than this
externalized instrumental means to an
end.
Um we have to look at how to recover
that first. And honestly, we should. I'm
not saying that we actually can, but
like we should be able to do that in
a bipartisan way.
Um but we have to have people on both
sides willing to kind of stop culture
warring and find common ground. And that
is something that is very difficult to
do in our hyper-polarized political
environment. And practically speaking,
you know, a concern that I have is that
the civic centers will just be seen as
conservative outposts.
Um then it's like it's a missed
opportunity. I mean, something that
was pretty magical about what we did in
Tulsa is that we did actually have uh
a lot of viewpoint diversity and
difference of experience and that was
definitely reflected in our faculty.
That was important to me in hiring
faculty.
And um we work we worked a lot
a whole lot explicitly on having
difficult and important conversations
across deep differences. Differences of
experience, differences of first
principles, differences of visions of
how to live and what's good. And I think
the thing that I'm most proud about,
honestly, is how wonderful that little
experiment went.
Except again for the fact that it ended,
right? Well, but but so [laughter] but
then is but then is
is the fundamental challenge
that
universities
see themselves as businesses?
And you you know, you were making the
case earlier that students want it. It
can be cost-effective. You can do it
while, right? While students are also
majoring in electrical engineering, but
>> We were around in the
>> unit right, but the but the university
the university mindset right now in a
time where again, there's going to be
fewer students. Lots of universities are
going to be closing, right? might be
show me
how this yields the maximum number of
graduates in the most remunerative jobs
who then will
give money to the university.
Right? I mean it it seems like even more
than sort of professionalization or
politics
maybe that's the mindset that that
you're up against where it's like people
people might tolerate you, but if you
can't tell a story about how
reading Aristotle
leads you to get an extra promotion that
leads to more donations down the road
at best you're going to be tolerated.
You're never going to be a priority.
Well, yeah, but I mean that's the sort
of disease that I'm trying to diagnose,
but it again, it's bipartisan. So um in
the state that I currently reside in
Oklahoma um our governor
uh recently um put out two executive
orders both relating to higher
education. Um one of them sort of
effectively ends tenure
um at public institutions except for OU
and OSU, but the other one um says that
all academic review
needs to be done um in terms of
workforce readiness. Like we'll look at
wages earned and things like this and
we'll do academic review on that basis.
Um so that's you know, just going to be
something that's mandated, but the other
interesting aspect of the executive
order is that
um it asks the state's uh Board of
Regents to investigate um a 90 credit
hour degree. So basically get rid of
most of general education.
>> [snorts]
>> And um I mean that's
>> a degree that's purely Yeah. purely
training. Workforce workforce training.
>> just just get rid of all of that other
stuff, you know, which is nonsense. And
so,
yeah, and it it puts me in an
interesting position because I myself am
critical of general education. I think
that we've dropped the ball, we've
failed there. But what I would ask
people to reform that rather than get
rid of it.
>> Yeah, last question.
>> Yes. Small question. What is What is
What does AI do to any of this? Yeah.
Um
yeah, AI I don't know. I go back and
forth about AI um and thinking that, you
know, it's the apocalypse and then also
noticing that like it can't even do an
index of my book. So,
you know, um I think I think I'll worry
more about AI when it can index my book.
But um
but I will say I think that AI um is
obviously going to change every single
institution in this country, including
obviously institutions of higher
education, and it will do things to the
labor market that um I think are going
to be pretty wild. I mean, there's a
huge sign outside the Times building
that says stop hiring humans. You see it
right when you come out of the I'm sure
you've noticed.
>> I've I've noticed. There's also the Jude
Jude Law There's a billboard that is
using Jude Law to sell legal AI.
>> Yes. Like that that's that's the one for
some reason that sticks in my mind. But
yes, stop hiring humans.
>> hiring humans. Now, why stop hiring
humans? Well, like the obvious reason is
because to err is human, right? We make
mistakes.
And um obviously AI makes mistakes, too,
but
um I think that
the problem of sort of labor
displacement leads people to make the
wrong case for the humanities in an age
of AI. So, what you hear people saying
now, and these are like tech industry
leaders, but they're also like deans at
prominent schools.
>> Right. Um that say, "Well, because AI is
changing the workforce in such and such
a way, we now need the humanities for
these soft skills that are now
incredibly important."
>> Mhm. And um
>> I I I may have said that to myself
contemplating my own children's future.
Yes.
>> Yes, this is the exactly the wrong case
to make for the humanities because it
denatures and destroys the thing that
it's supposed to be promoting. Right? If
If again liberal arts education,
humanities education is just uh
workforce training, you're not actually
going to be able to fully benefit from
the thing that you've instrumentalized.
So, I would say rather
>> in defense though of my own like
>> Don't just don't do it, Russ.
>> own parental lizard brain, right?
>> [laughter]
>> The work is a real part of human
affairs, right? It's not some It's not
some area where you you cease to be
human when you're at your job or
relating to your co-workers or handling
your producers who who may be concerned
that an interview has gone on too long
hypothetically, right?
It It is a zone of real and important
human interaction, and if you say one
thing that the humanities do is prepare
you to exist in a corporate environment
at, you know, a technology company, at a
startup, at The New York Times,
you aren't saying something that's
completely different from Cicero saying
the humanities prepare you to be a Roman
citizen, right? Like there's I'm just
saying there's a form of
>> [snorts]
>> the humanities prepare you to work that
I think is compatible with your
understanding of the humanities.
Well, I mean, what I would rather say,
let me circle back to that in a minute,
but what I would rather say is that AI
is good for the humanities because it
clarifies
in in a specially forceful way what is
at stake
>> [snorts]
>> if we stop being invested in this
project of cultivating our own humanity
and we give ourselves over to the robots
and the machines, right? Because
what the machines um can't really do
well and that quite frankly I think we
don't want them to do well
is to think about what our ends and our
goals are. Like we don't want them to
define for us right? What we're aiming
for.
And the humanities when done well
right? Real humane learning is an
investigation into what the goal of
human society is.
And so I think that what AI really
clarifies is the absolutely fundamental
existential cultural need for humane
learning.
And because it makes it so clear that if
we give up our thinking to machines,
what will be left, right? We will just
be a bundle of desires, right? That are
coming from outside and we will be a
kind of slave to them. We will not
really in any meaningful sense be free.
I don't care what the political system
is. If you haven't done that work
of deep humane reflection and
self-cultivation
um you are not really engaged in that
project of becoming a person. And so
when I talk to students about using AI
in the class, I don't talk about how I'm
going to punish them because one it's
like impossible to prove and two like
I'm not actually interested in punishing
them. What I remind them of in very
clear terms is that if they outsource
their thinking, they're simply
outsourcing their own humanity. And like
you can do that, but I think you'll
regret it. Because now is the time given
to you to really invest and God help us
robots are taking over
and areas that, you know, we might want
to really question whether they should
take over even if it does mean accepting
more error.
If we can't think about our own
humanity, I just think we're we're so on
the road to dystopia
and a result that none of us is going to
like or appreciate and I think that
artificial intelligence just makes that
very clear and in that respect, I'm
grateful for it.
I don't think there could be a better
place to end. So, Jennifer Frey, thank
you so much for joining me. Yeah, thanks
for having me.
>> [music]